--- 
title: 2023 Planning 
date: "2023-04-29" 
draft: true 
--- 

Hello future self, and people who have way too much time at their hand.  This is
an attempt by me to start getting into the blogging game again.  I have given
this a lot of try historically, and have found it difficult to stick to it. Well
I could say that "found it difficult to stick to it", is the story of my life,
but one cannot fault me for trying. As one of the most iconic fiction character
once said, 'Doing better next time, that's what life is.' So here I am trying to
do better this time.

Its pretty late in the year to really start planning or listing out 2023 goals,
but its better late than never. I am going to look at it from a Financial year
perspective, as we are still "technically" in April which is the first month of
the next financial year. I haven't given this a lot of thought so this might end
up becoming quiet a big draft. I did create a goal for myself in 2022, but 2022
wasn't a "normal" year for me. So most of the plans of 2022 either got
discarded, or someone(a wailing someone) stole the thunder and prioirity for
most of the year.  Having checked off mariage, changing a job, baby, buying an
apartment all in the span of 15 months has been quiet a ride, and I have mostly
stumbled my way across most of the decisions. It would be nice to have a plan
again, and it would be nice if I could try and have some measure of
predictability in the upcoming year. I think it would be nice to break my
aspirations into various buckets.

So I have broadly the following roles Professional, Parent, Personal, Spouse. 

As a Professional:

I first need to identify the metric over which I want to work. The relevant
metric at my current job is number of MR's per month. IMO that is a decent
metric. But that can't be the only metric. At a conventional company the Story
point that you close in a Sprint is also a good metric, to really encapsulate 
your effectiveness. But the nature of work within my team makes it so that there 
is not standardization between the weights. Its pretty consistent until the 
weights are 1 or 2 but as soon as the weight per issue starts to scale the 
consistency starts to drop. And most issues tend to be 3 or above. 

