---
title: "Procastination, Todo list and Digital wellbeing"
date: "2023-05-14"
draft: true
---

## Procrastination and Me

Procrastination and I have been long friends. Our romance had been "on" even
before I knew what Procrastinations meant. Waiting until the last moment to
really work on something. Putting something off 'for tomorrow', or 'the next
hour', or 'right after I have some tea', or 'just after this youtube video', and
the most recent ones but 1000 times more toxic one's 'just after this next
reel/short'. If I try to think back over my earlier years, I can clearly
remember one science class in school(dont remember the grade maybe 6th?) where I
had not done my homework and the teacher was going around the class collecting
homework. I remember my fear while she was coming towards my desk, I remember
acting all frantic and trying to locate the homework in my bag infront of the
teacher. I remember lying that I have done the homework but have forgotten it at
home and then apologizing profusely promising that I will get it tomorrow. The
truth was I was playing the day before and had decided to do the homework later,
and had forgotten all about it until dinner. Because I had went out to play
after telling my parents that there was no homework, I hardly could have
admitted that there is something now. So I slept, and the next day the event
took place. If you are wondering why didn't I just do it without telling my
parents, it is because I couldn't have done it without them knowing. We lived in
a one Room kitchen, and we were always under my mothers and later at night even
my fathers watchfull eye. I think that is my earliest memory of Procrastination.
It also puts light on parenting at our house while I was growing up, I dont wish
to alarm people into thinking I was subjected to cruelity, I was loved by my
parents. But they were particularly strict about education and homeworks! I have
come a long way since 6th grade, and still the problem has stayed. 

## Source of Procrastination over the years
As the years has gone by, and with the advent of smartphones the problem had
multiplied (atleast for me). Back in the day (pre smartphone era), my fallback
for procrastinating was usually to read some fiction novels, or go out to play.
There were odd times where I would just lie down and do nothing, but that was an
exception rather than the rule. And being limited in my resources I did not have
unlimited books to read from. I did not even have the energy to play all day so
I use to rule out my distractions fairly easily and come back to things that
really needed doing. TV time was controled by my parents so I couldn't have had
unlimited TV hours. I did not have a personal computer until very late in my
life, and even when I did get a personal laptop when I was in my 12th grade,
internet then wasn't as enticing and addictive as it has now become. I think it
was also the fact that in India even until the early 2010's internet and laptops
were not a norm for every household. We use to visit cyber-cafe's to do
something on the Internet and had to pay 10Rs per hour to access emails or even
use Orkut and Facebook. Orkut was the rage when I was in 11th and soon Facebook
became the new rage by the time I reached college. But procrastinating on the
internet was not feasible due to lack of infrastructure and even opportunities.
With the advent of smartphones and the rise in social media, in a span of 10
years everyone now has access to internet 24x7. The threshold to simulate
your mind which back in the day involved reading or playing, has now transformed
into swiping over my mobile device and waching a short video. I dont think
reading fiction novel is better than watching Instagram reel, but I do think
focused reading takes effort and energy, and the mental simulation is a more
involved activity where you are actively imagining a world and working with
characters as the story progresses. Whereas while watching a reel, the
simulation is instant and the effort it takes on your end is negligbile. So it
isn't a surprise we find people getting addicted to these reels and youtube
shorts. The threshold to "simulate" your mind has reduced drastically. It is
easier to scroll Instagram and give yourself the dopamine boost than it is to
give the same dopamine boost by finishing a task. Instagram or youtube or tiktok
or twitter arent the only place where this happens, I have personally done this on 
Linkedin and some popular News websites!

## Becoming aware of the Problem
Few years ago, I started to notice a pattern in my life where I would avoid
working on difficult tasks, sometime for weeks and would spend most of my time
on social media. It was during the time I was pursuing my remote masters and
every other week we had assignments. During the same time in my office I had a
lot of deliverables assigned to me, since I had changed my team and the pressure
to gather context and become productive was overwhelming. I started getting
stretched to my limit with so much to do and having to prioritize things daily.
I ended up most of the week not doing anything, spending time in meetings,
spending time on my phone, and having to work crazy hours to meet commitments by
the end of the sprint, and then having to work overnight for college
submissions. After 3 months, I started realising that it is a problem and I need
to figure out a solution for this. I had not suffered because of this, either in
my job or in my college assignments, because I did meet my commitments or would
have an honest explaination on times I could not. But everytime it did happen, I 
wondered why did I allow things to come to this. And yet the next time I was there
again having to finish lots of things in a span of few days.

## Instrumentation
I was concious that I was wasting my time, but I wasn't sure how much in actual
numbers. And I wasn't even clear about my reasons for wasting time. I have always enjoyed
problem solving and coding and I was required to do just that. And still I was
finding myself in a position where I would regret my behaviour after 2 weeks.
After 2 week of concious observation, I realized that the problem is two fold. 

1. I had alot to do, there was lack of clarity in what I should do
first, and figuring things out, planning and priortizing was not easy.
2. It was easier to distract myself by using my phone, and looking at some
memes, or chating with some friends or helping others figure their task out.

I also realized that I was spending upwards of 5 hours per day on my phone. I was
spending hours playing Chess. I was spending hours browsing youtube and
instagram. I used Android's Digital wellbeing to get the statistics. 
I also needed to solve my priortization problem, so I started using a dedicated
Todolist.
